MATH1061/7861 Glossary

Basic Terms
Integer A number with no fractional part. It includes the counting numbers {1, 2, 3, . . .},
zero {0}, and the negatives of the counting numbers {−1, −2, −3, . . .}. The set of all integers
is written as Z.
Even Number An integer that can be written in the form 2k for some integer k. Every
integer is either odd or even (but not both). The last digit of an even number must be 0, 2,
4, 6 or 8. Some examples of even numbers are −12, 0, 2, 8 and 42. Note that 0 is even, as
0 = 2 × 0. The set of all even integers is sometimes written as Zeven .
Odd Number An integer that can be written in the form 2k + 1 for some integer k. Every
integer is either odd or even (but not both). The last digit of an odd number must be 1, 3,
5, 7 or 9. Some examples of odd numbers are −3, 1, 7 and 35. The set of all odd integers
is sometimes written as Zodd .
Rational Number A number that can be expressed in the form ab for some integers a, b
with b ̸= 0. The set of all rational numbers is written as Q.
Real Number Any point on the number line, such as 1, 15.82, −0.1, 3/4, π/2, etc. Positive
or negative, large or small, whole numbers or decimal numbers are all real numbers. The
set of all real numbers is written as R.
Irrational Number A real number that cannot be expressed in the form ab for some integers
a, b with b ̸= 0. Every real number is either rational or irrational (but not both). The set
of all irrational numbers is often written as R \ Q or Q.
Prime Number An integer greater than 1 whose only positive divisors are 1 and itself.
The first few prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11 and 13.
Composite Number An integer n greater than 1 such that n = rs for some positive
integers r and s with r ̸= 1 and s ̸= 1. A composite number is always the product of 2 or
more prime numbers. Note that 0 and 1 are neither prime nor composite.
Factor/Divisor An integer that divides another integer with no remainder. If k is a factor
of n, then there is some integer a such that ak = n. We write k | n to indicate that k divides
n.
P
Summation The addition of a sequence of numbers, often written using the symbol .
For example,
5
X
i2 = 32 + 42 + 52 = 50.
i=3

1

Factorial The factorial of a positive integer n is the product of all the positive integers less
than or equal to n. It is written as n!. For example 5! = 5 × 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 = 120.
Coefficient A constant by which a variable is multiplied. For example, the coefficient of
x2 in 3x3 − 2x2 + 5 is −2. (Refer to Video 40: Binomial Coefficients)

Logical Equivalence
Statement/Proposition A declarative sentence with a definite meaning, with a truth
value that’s either true (T) or false (F). It can never be both, neither, or somewhere in
between. (Refer to Video 1: Logical Form)
Negation The negation of a statement A is written as ∼ A or ¬A and is often called “not
A”. If A is true, then its negation is false; if A is false, then its negation is true. (Refer to
Video 1: Logical Form)
Conjunction The conjunction of two statements is true if and only if both statements are
true. The conjunction of two statements P and Q is written as P ∧ Q (whenever you see ∧
read “and”). (Refer to Video 1: Logical Form)
Disjunction The disjunction of two statements is true if and only if at least one of the
statements is true. The disjunction of two statements P and Q is written as P ∨Q (whenever
you see ∨ read “or”). (Refer to Video 1: Logical Form)
Logical Equivalence Two statement forms are logically equivalent if they have the same
truth value for any assignment of truth values to its variables. If two statement forms P
and Q are logically equivalent, we write P ≡ Q. (Refer to Video 2: Logical Equivalence)
Tautology A statement form which is always true, regardless of the truth values of its
variables. (Refer to Video 2: Logical Equivalence)
Contradiction A statement form which is always false, regardless of the truth values of its
variables. (Refer to Video 2: Logical Equivalence)
Conditional statement A statement P → Q, read as “P implies Q” or “if P then Q”. It
is logically equivalent to ∼ P ∨ Q. The first statement (P in this case) is sometimes called
the hypothesis, and the second statement (Q in this case) is sometimes called the conclusion.
(Refer to Video 3: Conditional Statement)
Biconditional statement A statement P ↔ Q, which is read as “P if and only if Q”. It
is logically equivalent to (P → Q) ∧ (Q → P ). (Refer to Video 3: Conditional Statement)
Contrapositive The contrapositive of the conditional statement P → Q is the statement
∼ Q → ∼ P . It is logically equivalent to the original statement. (Refer to Video 3: Conditional Statement)

2

Valid and Invalid Arguments
Valid An argument is valid if, whenever all of the premises are true, the conclusion is also
true. (Refer to Video 4: Valid and invalid arguments)
Invalid An argument is invalid if it is possible to have a situation in which all of the premises
are true but the conclusion is false. (Refer to Video 4: Valid and invalid arguments)

Quantified Statements
Predicate A sentence that contains finitely many variables, and becomes a statement when
the variables are given specific values. (Refer to Video 6: Quantified statements)
Truth Set The truth set of a predicate P (x) is the set of all values in the domain that,
when assigned to x, make P (x) a true statement. (Refer to Video 6: Quantified statements)
Quantifiers The universal quantifier “for all”, written as ∀, is used to say that a predicate
is true for every member of a domain. The existential quantifier “there exists”, written as
∃, is used to say that a predicate is true for at least one member of the domain. (Refer to
Video 6: Quantified statements)

Divisibility & Modular Arithmetic
Factorisation A method of writing numbers as the product of their factors.
Unique Prime Factorisation Theorem The theorem stating that every integer greater
than 1 either is a prime number or can be represented as a product of prime numbers. This
representation is unique up to the ordering of the primes. For example, 1200 = 24 × 3 × 52
(Refer to Video 13: Divisibility)
Floor Given any x ∈ R, the floor of x, denoted ⌊x⌋, is the greatest integer less than or
equal to x. For example, ⌊2.3⌋ = 2, ⌊8⌋ = 8 and ⌊−1.5⌋ = −2. (Refer to Video 14: Modular
Arithmetic)
Ceiling Given any x ∈ R, the ceiling of x, denoted ⌈x⌉, is the smallest integer greater than
or equal to x. For example, ⌈2.3⌉ = 3, ⌈8⌉ = 8 and ⌈−1.5⌉ = −1. (Refer to Video 14:
Modular Arithmetic)
Remainder The number left over when one integer is divided by another in integer division.
For example, 16 divided by 3 has a remainder of 1, as 16 = 5 × 3 + 1. If r is the remainder
of n divided by d, then 0 ≤ r < d. (Refer to Video 14: Modular Arithmetic)
Modulo Integers a and b are considered equivalent modulo n if n divides a−b. We sometimes
also say that “a is congruent to b modulo n” and write a ≡ b (mod n). (Refer to Video 14:
Modular Arithmetic)
Euclidean Algorithm An algorithm for finding the greatest common divisor of two positive
integers. (Refer to Video 15: The Euclidean Algorithm)

3

Sequences
Sequence An ordered list of elements. Each element is called a term. (Refer to Video 16:
Sequences)
Explicit formula A formula that provides a way to calculate the nth term of a sequence
without the previous terms in the sequence needing to be calculated. (Refer to Video 16:
Sequences)
Recursive definition A definition given by means of recursion. The definition is composed
of two parts: the base case, which is an explicit definition of a few terms, and the recursive
formula, which is the rule used to calculate new terms based on previous terms. (Refer to
Video 19: Recursive Definitions)

Set Theory
Set An unordered collection of elements. (Refer to Video 21: Set theory definitions)
Empty Set The set with no elements, written {} or ∅. (Refer to Video 21: Set Theory
Definitions)
Set Equality Two sets are equal if they have the same elements. Note that order and
duplicates don’t matter, so {1, 2} = {2, 1, 2}. (Refer to Video 21: Set Theory Definitions)
Subset A set Y is a subset of X (written Y ⊆ X) if every element in Y also occurs in X.
For example, {1, 2, 3} ⊆ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. (Refer to Video 21: Set Theory Definitions)
Proper subset A set Y is a proper subset of X (written Y ⊂ X or Y ⊊ X) if Y is a subset
of X, but Y is not equal to X. (Refer to Video 21: Set Theory Definitions)
Union The union of two sets X and Y (written X ∪ Y ) is the set containing all elements
of X and all elements of Y . (Refer to Video 21: Set theory definitions)
Intersection The intersection of two sets X and Y (written X ∩ Y ) is the set containing
all elements that occur in both X and Y . (Refer to Video 21: Set Theory Definitions)
Power Set The power set of a set A (written P(A)) is the set of all possible subsets of
A. For example, P({1, 2}) = {∅, {1}, {2}, {1, 2}}. (Refer to Video 22: More Definitions and
Examples of Sets)
Cartesian product For sets A and B, the Cartesian product A × B is the set consisting of all ordered pairs (a, b) where a ∈ A and b ∈ B. For example, {1, 2} × {3, 4} =
{(1, 3), (1, 4), (2, 3), (2, 4)}. (Refer to Video 22: More Definitions and Examples of Sets)

Functions
One-to-One/Injective A function f : X → Y is one-to-one if for any a, b ∈ X with a ̸= b
we have f (a) ̸= f (b). This is equivalent to saying that if f (a) = f (b) for some a, b ∈ X,
then a = b. (Refer to Video 25: One-one, Onto and Inverse Functions)
4

Onto A function f : X → Y is onto if for any y ∈ Y there exists some x ∈ X such that
f (x) = y. A function is onto if and only if the image of the function is equal to its codomain.
(Refer to Video 25: One-one, Onto and Inverse Functions)
Inverse An inverse function is a function that undoes the action of the other function. A
function g is the inverse of an injective function f if whenever y = f (x) then x = g(y). We
often write f −1 to denote the inverse of f . (Refer to Video 25: One-one, Onto and Inverse
Functions)
Bijective A bijective function f : X → Y is a function that is both one-to-one and onto.
Such a function is called a bijection. (Refer to Video 25: One-one, Onto and Inverse
Functions)
Composition For any functions g : A → B and f : B → C, the composition of f and g,
written f ◦ g, is the function f ◦ g : A → C defined by (f ◦ g)(a) = f (g(a)), for all a ∈ A.
(Refer to Video 26: Composition of Functions)

Cardinality
Cardinality A measure of the size of a set. The cardinality of a set A is written as |A|.
For finite sets, the cardinality is the number of elements in A. For example, |{35, 42}| = 2.
(Refer to Video 27: Cardinality)
Countable set A set with the same cardinality as some subset of Z≥0 . A countable set
can have finite many or infinitely many elements. (Refer to Video 28: Countable and
Uncountable Sets)
Uncountable set An infinite set that contains too many elements to be countable. A set
A is uncountable if there is no bijection from A to Z. (Refer to Video 28: Countable and
Uncountable Sets)

Set Relations
Set Relation A binary relation R between two sets A and B is a subset of the Cartesian
product A × B. If (a, b) ∈ R, we say that a and b are related under R and write aRb. (Refer
to Video 30: Reflexivity, Symmetry, Transitivity)
Reflexive A binary relation R over a set A is reflexive if every element of A is related to
itself. This can be written as ∀a ∈ A, aRa. (Refer to Video 30: Reflexivity, Symmetry,
Transitivity)
Symmetric A binary relation R over a set A is symmetric if aRb implies that bRa for all
a, b ∈ A. (Refer to Video 30: Reflexivity, symmetry, transitivity)
Transitive A binary relation R over a set A is transitive if, for any a, b, c ∈ A such that
aRb and bRc, we have aRc. (Refer to Video 30: Reflexivity, Symmetry, Transitivity)
Antisymmetric A relation R over a set A is called antisymmetric if for any a, b ∈ A, aRb
and bRa imply that a = b. Note that a relation being antisymmetric is different to the
relation being not symmetric. (Refer to Video 32: Partial order relations)
5

Equivalence Relation A binary relation that is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive. (Refer
to Video 31: Equivalence Relations)
Partition A partition of a set is a grouping of the set’s elements into non-empty subsets,
in such a way that every element is included in one and only one of the subsets. The union
of all the parts of a partition is equivalent to the whole set, and the intersection of any two
distinct parts of a partition is the empty set. (Refer to Video 31: Equivalence Relations)
Partial Order Relation A binary relation R that is reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive. (Refer to Video 32: Partial order relations)
Total Order Relation A partial order relation R on a set A such that for all a, b ∈ A,
either aRb or bRa (or both). (Refer to Video 30: Reflexivity, Symmetry, Transitivity)

Groups
Group A set G of elements together with a binary operation ∗ (called the group operation)
satisfying four properties: closure, associativity, the identity property, and the inverse property. A group is commonly written as (G, ∗). (Refer to Video 33: Definitions and Examples
of Groups)
Subgroup If (G, ∗) and (H, ∗) are groups and H ⊆ G, then (H, ∗) is a subgroup of (G, ∗).
A subset of G is a group if it is closed, contains the identity and contains inverses. (Refer
to Video 34: Elementary Properties of Groups)
Field A field (F, +, ·) is a set F with two binary operations + and · such that (F, +) is an
abelian group; (F − {0}, ·) is an abelian group where 0 is the identity of (F, +); and for any
a, b, c ∈ F we have a · (b + c) = a · b + a · c. (Refer to Video 36: Definitions and Examples
of Fields)

Counting
Probability A number between 0 (impossible) and 1 (certain) expressing the likelihood
of an event occurring. For instance, the sun will rise tomorrow has a probability of 1. It
can be expressed as a fraction, a decimal, or a percentage. The probability of an event X
occurring is written P(X). (Refer to Video 39: Introduction to probability)
Pigeonhole Principle The pigeonhole principle states that if n + 1 objects are placed into
n boxes, then there is at least one box containing two objects. (Refer to Video 42: The
Pigeonhole Principle)

Graph Theory
Graph A graph is a pair (V, E) composed of two sets: the set V of vertices, and the set E
of edges, which consists of unordered pairs of vertices. (Refer to video 43 Introduction to
Graph Theory)
6

Simple graph A simple graph is a graph that contains no loops and no multiple edges.
(Refer to video 43 Introduction to Graph Theory)
Adjacent Vertices Two vertices u and v of a graph G are adjacent if there is an edge
between u and v in G. (Refer to Video 44: Walks, trails and circuits)
Degree The degree of a vertex v (written deg(v)) is the number of edges incident to v.
Walk A walk is a sequence v0 , e1 , v1 , e2 , v2 , . . . , vn , where each vi is a vertex, and each ei is
an edge with endpoints vi−1 and vi . (Refer to Video 44: Walks, Trails and Circuits)
Cycle A walk that starts and ends at the same vertex but otherwise has no repeated vertices.
(Refer to Video 44: Walks, trails and circuits)
Non-Trivial Cycle A cycle consisting of more than one vertex (Refer to Video 44: Walks,
trails and circuits)
Trail A trail is a walk where all the edges are distinct. (Refer to Video 44: Walks, Trails
and Circuits)
Circuit A circuit is a trail that starts and ends at the same vertex. (Refer to Video 44:
Walks, Trails and Circuits)
Acyclic A graph that does not contain any non-trivial cycles.
Connected Graph A graph such that for any pair of vertices, there is a walk between
them. (Refer to Video 44: Walks, Trails and Circuits)
Eulerian Trail A trail that uses every edge of the graph exactly once. (Refer to Video 44:
Walks, Trails and Circuits)
Eulerian Circuit A circuit that uses every edge of the graph exactly once. (Refer to Video
44: Walks, Trails and Circuits)
Regular graph A graph in which all vertices have the same degree. (Refer to Video 44:
Walks, Trails and Circuits)
Cycle Graph A graph consisting of n vertices v1 , . . . , vn and n edges given by the set
{{v1 , v2 }, . . . , {vn−1 , vn }, {vn , v1 }}. It is denoted by Cn . (Refer to Video 44: Walks, Trails
and Circuits)
Adjacency Matrix The adjacency matrix for a graph with vertices v1 , v2 , . . . , vn is the
n × n matrix A = [aij ] where each entry aij is the number of edges with endpoints vi , vj .
(Refer to Video 45: Matrix Representations of Graphs)
Incidence Matrix The incidence matrix for a graph with vertices v1 , v2 , . . . , vn and edges
e1 , e2 , . . . , em is the n × m matrix A = [aij ] where each entry aij is the number of times
vertex vi is incident with edge ej . (Refer to Video 45: Matrix Representations of Graphs)
Tree An acyclic, connected, undirected graph. (Refer to Video 46: Trees)

7

